Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s
part two of our three-part mini-series
on “Tyrants Of The Roman Empire”.
In case you missed it, in part
one we talked about Caligula.
Next time, in part three,
we’ll talk about Commodus.
And today it’s Nero, a man who
has been called the antichrist,
remembered by history for brutality,
depravity and almost unmatched sadism.
You don’t have to have listened to part
one, on Caligula, to enjoy this one, but
it will make more sense if you have, and
rather than go over stuff again, I’ll
assume that you’ve listened to part one.
So now is the time to press pause
and go and listen to that one, in
case you haven’t done so already.
Alright then, let’s not waste a minute,
especially as this is going to be quite a
long one, and find out about Emperor Nero.
As you may know, there is the stereotype
of the Italian “mother’s boy”, a boy, a
man even, who has a particularly close
bond with his mother, perhaps even living
with her until well into his adult years.
There’s a word for this, “mammone”,
and, like many stereotypes,
it has some basis in fact.
I did an ERASMUS exchange at the
University of Naples, and can certainly
say that my male Italian friends would be
constantly calling their mothers, updating
them on where they were going that
evening or what they had had for lunch.
Occasionally, the intensity of this
mother-son relationship did drive
something of a wedge between these
young men and their girlfriends.
And even going back to Ancient
Rome, we can see that this
is not a modern phenomenon.
In AD 58, a young man was
taunted by his new lover over
his relationship with his mother.
The man invited his mother to a
feast at Baiae, an ancient Roman
town just across the bay of Naples.
The mother came to the feast, and on her
return her son offered her his boat, as
hers had been damaged on the journey over.
This wasn’t a kindly gesture,
and the mother knew it.
The son, the then 21-year-old
Emperor Nero, had ordered for a
specially modified boat to be built
that would sink at a predetermined
time, killing everyone onboard.
His mother, Aggripina the Younger,
had got wind of the plan, but she had
little choice but to go ahead with it.
She boarded the ship, knowing her
only son was sending her to her death.
Sure enough, as the ship sailed across
the bay, it started to disintegrate.
Pieces of wood broke off, and
the vessel started to sink.
What Nero hadn’t bargained for was
that his mother was a strong swimmer.
She managed to swim to shore, and she was
met by cheers and well-wishers, rejoicing
with relief that the emperor’s mother
had survived this "tragic accident".
This relief wouldn’t last for long.
When Nero got wind that his plot
had failed, he hatched another.
He sent armed men to his mother’s
villa, instructing them to
dispatch her, once and for all.
They surrounded her bed, and when she
realised that her fate was inevitable,
she pointed at her womb, her belly,
telling the men to “strike here, because
that is where the monster came from”.
It is an impressive story, and has
gone down in the history books as
just one example of the callous
brutality of Nero, a man whose very
name has become a byword for cruelty.
It is also, perhaps, not true.
Several modern historians have tried
to revisit the myth and reputation of
Nero, with some concluding that he was
probably not quite as bad as most people
think, and others simply pointing out
that the accounts we have of his life
and his actions, like those of Caligula
are highly biased, so we should not
blindly accept everything that is written
about him as true, but rather as the
historical record of men with an agenda.
Now, to understand Nero, like we did last
episode, we must start before his birth.
Caligula, as you’ll remember
from last time, had no
surviving children of his own.
When he was stabbed to death in
that theatre corridor in AD 41,
the title of emperor passed to his
uncle Claudius, a man whom almost
nobody expected to become emperor.
Claudius had been hidden
away for much of his life.
He walked with a limp, spoke with
a stammer, and had been dismissed
as weak-minded by his own family.
Yet the Praetorian Guard, who were keen
to have someone malleable on the throne,
found him cowering behind a curtain in
the palace and declared him emperor.
And Claudius actually turned out to be a
more competent emperor than many expected.
He expanded the empire into Britain,
reformed aspects of the legal
system, and generally kept the
machine of empire ticking over.
But for today’s episode, and the story
of Nero, Claudius matters not so much
for his conquests as for his marriages.
In particular, his final one.
And it’s here that we need to
re-introduce Agrippina the Younger.
She was the sister of Caligula, and
was also the great-granddaughter
of the first emperor, Augustus.
She was the Roman equivalent
of royalty, and she married a
high-ranking Roman politican.
They had one biological child,
Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, but
his chances at becoming emperor
looked slim at best, as he wasn’t
directly in the line of succession.
What’s more, a couple of years
into his reign as emperor, Caligula
had discovered that his sister
was plotting to have him killed.
He sent her into exile on a
remote Mediterannean island.
And a couple of years
later, her husband died.
When Caligula was deposed and
Claudius made emperor, the new
emperor recalled Agrippina from exile.
She re-emerged in public life,
back in Rome, but she was a
widow with no connections.
She was, however, ruthlessly
ambitious, and incredibly capable.
To cut a long story short, through a
series of marriages, alliances, and
deaths that some have claimed were
murder, Agrippina ended up married
to her uncle, emperor Claudius.
Claudius had another son from his
previous marriage, Britannicus,
but the boy was a few years younger
than Agrippina’s son, Lucius.
Agrippina managed to persuade Claudius
to officially adopt Lucius, making the
two boys the ageing Claudius’s heirs.
And to cement his position, she arranged
for Lucius, at the age of sixteen,
to marry Claudius’ daughter, Octavia.
It was an extraordinary piece of dynastic
chess, 10 out of 10 political manoeuvring.
In less than ten years, Agrippina had
gone from outcast to the very centre
of Roman power, and had placed her
son in the best possible position.
This son, Lucius, would
later be known as Nero.
And then, in AD 54, after one of
his famous banquets, Claudius died.
Poisoned mushrooms, according to one
story, although whether Agrippina had
a hand in that, or they were simply
bad mushrooms, we can’t be sure.
What we do know is that the
timing was perfect for Nero.
Britannicus, Claudius’ biological
son, was still too young to rule.
Nero, by contrast, was seventeen,
married to Claudius’ daughter,
and already adopted as his heir.
Agrippina had the Praetorian
Guard on side, and the Senate
fell quickly into line.
At just seventeen years old, the boy
Lucius became emperor Nero of Rome.
Now, a seventeen-year-old emperor
with no military experience and
no political record might sound
like a recipe for disaster.
And in the long run, it was.
But at the very beginning,
things looked more promising.
Nero’s accession was
greeted with widespread joy.
The memory of Caligula’s madness was still
fresh, and Claudius, though perfectly
competent, had been seen as dull and
dominated by his wives and freedmen.
Nero, by contrast, was young, handsome,
descended from Augustus, and backed by
a powerful group of well-known advisers.
On one side was his mother, Agrippina,
who had schemed and fought her way
to this moment, and who seems to have
intended to rule through her son.
On the other side were two men who would
become household names in Roman history:
Seneca, the Stoic philosopher, and Burrus,
the commander of the Praetorian Guard.
And for the first few years
of Nero’s reign this trio
effectively governed the empire.
And they did it…pretty well.
This was a period that later writers
would nostalgically call the quinquennium
Neronis, the “five good years of Nero”.
Nero cut taxes, eased the financial
burdens on the provinces, and
even banned secret trials, a clear
rejection of the paranoia that had
characterised the rule of Tiberius
and, of course, his own uncle Caligula.
He insisted that no one could be
condemned without the Senate’s approval,
and he declared that he wanted to end
the practice of capital punishment.
This sounded almost like the voice of a
philosopher-king, and that wasn’t far off.
His tutor, Seneca, had filled his head
with Stoic ideals, lofty talk about
clemency, virtue, and good governance.
And it seemed that Nero was
putting them into practice.
Things were looking up.
And he wasn’t only popular with the
elite; the Roman people also adored him.
He gave them games and spectacles,
but also a sense of relief.
After years of instability, they
had a young emperor who appeared
gentle, approachable, even merciful.
Statues of him went up all across
the empire, coins bore his handsome
young face, and poets praised him
as the dawn of a new golden age.
But even in these golden years,
there were hints of what was to come.
Nero’s true passions were not in the
Senate chamber or on the battlefield,
but on the stage and in the circus.
He wrote poetry, practised
singing and acting, and even
took lessons in chariot racing.
By all accounts, he was quite
good at these pursuits, and
took them pretty seriously.
But to Rome’s elite, this was scandalous;
emperors were supposed to command armies,
not play music or rehearse tragedies.
Actors and musicians, after all, were
at the bottom of society, in the same
category as gladiators and prostitutes.
Still, the public lapped it up.
Here was an emperor who mingled
with the people, who enjoyed the
same entertainments they did,
who seemed almost one of them.
And what’s more, one who seemed to
be running Rome pretty effectively.
But behind the scenes,
things were not so calm.
His mother, Agrippina,
was growing restless.
She believed Nero owed everything
to her: his throne, his
marriage, his very survival.
She expected to share power, to
be listened to, to be obeyed.
But she found herself increasingly
sidelined by the men in Nero’s
life: Seneca and Burrus.
She pushed back, demanding more
influence, reminding Nero of
everything that she had done for him.
And this tension between
mother and son soon escalated.
A particular flashpoint
came over a love affair.
Nero was married at the time, but
shortly after he became emperor,
he became infatuated with a
former slave named Claudia Acte.
Agrippina was horrified.
To her, it was not just a disgrace,
the emperor of Rome lowering himself
to consort with a freedwoman,
but a threat to her own position.
If Acte gained influence, Agrippina’s
grip on her son would weaken even further.
According to the historian Tacitus,
Agrippina’s fury was such that she even
tried to intimidate Nero by reminding him
that Britannicus, the biological son of
Claudius, was still alive, was soon coming
of age, and might one day stake his claim.
That was a dangerous card to play.
Dangerous for Britannicus, at least.
In AD 55, the young boy was at a
banquet with the imperial family when
he suddenly collapsed, gasping for air.
He died on the spot.
Tacitus says he was poisoned on Nero’s
orders, just days before he was due to
put on the toga virilis and formally
become an adult in the eyes of Rome.
Now, whether Britannicus truly
posed a threat or not, he was gone.
And with his death, one
more rival was removed.
Whether it was because he now felt more
secure in his position and didn’t need her
anymore, or whether it was because he felt
she had overstepped the mark, we can only
hypothesise, but Agrippina’s influence
over her son continued to decline.
She no longer sat beside
him at public ceremonies.
Her face was removed from the front
of Roman coins and relegated to the
back, then it was removed altogether.
And she was banished from the palace.
Her power was ebbing
away, and she knew it.
Tacitus paints a vivid picture of her
trying to do everything she could to
claw it back, from scolding her son,
attempting to win over the Praetorian
Guard, even, at one point, hinting
that she might champion someone else.
But each move only
pushed Nero further away.
By the time we reach the year AD
58, Nero was openly defying her.
He was emperor in his own right now,
and the struggle between mother and
son was heading towards its bloody
conclusion, the one we began this
episode with, in Baiae, with sinking
boats, daggers, and a mother urging
her assassins to stab her in the womb.
After Agrippina’s death, Nero was
finally free of his mother’s shadow.
But if he thought this would
win him peace of mind, and room
to breathe, he was mistaken.
His mother’s death was publicly
reported as suicide, self-destruction
after the discovery of her
supposed plot to overthrow her son.
But few in Rome bought this story.
It was widely accepted that she had
been killed on the emperor’s orders.
Now, this wouldn’t of course have been
the first time an emperor had killed
someone who was inconvenient; Ancient
Rome was all about knocking off your
political rivals, current, past or future,
and it wasn’t particularly frowned upon.
But the difference was that killing your
own mother was a step too far, even for
the sometimes bloodthirsty ancient Romans.
The Senate congratulated him, of course.
The Praetorian Guard swore their loyalty.
Flattery was part of the job
description when dealing with emperors.
Yet whispers spread across Rome: the
young emperor had crossed a line.
And after Agrippina’s murder, something
flipped in Nero, or at least his behaviour
became even more erratic and unusual.
He became even more
obsessed with performance.
He had always been a keen singer,
actor, and poet, but became
utterly addicted to the crowd.
At first, he confined himself to
small audiences, singing or reciting
verses at private gatherings.
But soon he wanted more.
He wanted to be seen, to be heard,
to be cheered by the people.
The historian Suetonius tells us he
would lock audiences in the theatre
until he had finished his performances,
no matter how long they dragged on.
For Rome’s elite, this was humiliating.
To perform on stage was the
lowest of the low, an activity for
slaves and actors, not emperors.
And while this was all going
on, costs of his various
extravagences continued to mount.
Nero lavished money on games, spectacles,
and extensive building projects.
He built a new wooden amphitheatre
for shows, and he spent huge sums
on plays, music, and chariot races.
The treasury, which had been healthy
under the fiscally conservative
Claudius, began to creak under the
weight of his successor’s indulgence.
And in July of AD 64, the city–and
the empire–would face disaster.
10 years into his rule, a huge
fire broke out in the city of Rome.
Fires were not uncommon in the
crowded, wooden tenements of the
capital, but this one was different.
It raged for six days and seven nights,
destroying vast swathes of the city.
When at last it seemed to be
under control, it flared up
again, lasting another three days.
There is no reliable record of how many
people died, but what is certain is that
by the end, most of Rome lay in ruins.
Entire districts were gone, temples
and public buildings reduced to ash,
and thousands of people left homeless.
And where was Nero during all of this?
Well, there is this popular idea that
he was in Rome, looking over his burning
capital, playing the fiddle, the violin.
It might fit the characterisation
of Nero, but it isn’t true.
For starters, the fiddle wasn’t
invented for another 1,500 years.
If he did anything, it would have
been to play the lute or to sing, but
there is no evidence that he did this.
According to Tacitus, he was
at his villa in Antium, by the
coast, when the fire began.
He rushed back to the city, opening
up the Campus Martius, the imperial
gardens, and even his own palace to
shelter those who had lost their homes.
He also arranged for food supplies
to be brought in to prevent famine.
But this was not the story that spread.
Suetonius and later sources tell
us that Nero stood on a tower, lyre
in hand, watching Rome burn while
singing about the fall of Troy.
Tacitus, who wrote closer to the time, is
more careful: he says only that there were
rumours, and that people believed them.
What does seem clear is that
suspicion quickly turned on Nero.
Some claimed he had ordered the fire
to clear space for an ambitious new
building project, the Domus Aurea,
or “Golden House”, an enormous
palace complex that would rise in
the very heart of the destroyed city.
This project did go ahead and it
was breathtaking: artificial lakes,
porticos stretching for hundreds of
meters, halls glittering with gold and
jewels, and a colossal statue of Nero.
more than 30 metres high, standing
like a god at the entrance.
But as to whether the fire was
started on Nero’s orders, most
historians are pretty skeptical.
Perhaps the fire was an
unfortunate accident.
Perhaps it was spread by looters.
Or perhaps Nero’s men did set
it, whether on his orders or not.
What mattered was that people
believed he was responsible.
To deflect suspicion, Nero
looked for scapegoats.
He turned to a small and obscure
sect in Rome: the Christians.
They were accused of starting the fire,
and subjected to brutal punishments.
Some were torn apart by dogs, others
were crucified, others burned alive
to light Nero’s gardens at night.
Grisly stuff indeed, especially
because there is no evidence that
Christians had anything to do with it.
Unfortunately, this scapegoating
seemed to work, at least temporarily.
The public had been given a scalp,
and this had satisfied their
immediate thirst for a culprit.
But still, Nero’s authority
was far from stable.
And in the years after the Great
Fire, his private life became just
as notorious as his public one.
He had been married, since the
age of sixteen, to Octavia,
the daughter of Claudius.
She was popular with the Roman people:
modest, dutiful, the very picture
of the traditional Roman matron.
But Nero despised her.
He accused her of infertility,
neglected her, and eventually,
in AD 62, divorced her.
Only days later, he married
his mistress, Poppaea Sabina.
She was ambitious, glamorous, and
had previously been married to
Otho, a friend of Nero’s who would
later, briefly, be emperor himself.
The Roman people did not take
kindly to Octavia’s dismissal.
There were public protests demanding
her return, and statues of her
were paraded through the streets.
Nero’s response was ruthless: he
charged her with adultery, which
she was almost certainly not guilty
of, and had her executed in exile.
There is even an account that
her head was brought to Poppea,
Nero’s new wife, as proof.
And if Poppea thought that
Nero would be nicer to her,
she would be sorely mistaken.
According to Tacitus, in AD 65, while she
was pregnant, Nero grew so angry with her
that he kicked her to death, reportedly
aiming his blows at her stomach to
ensure he also killed their unborn child.
And I’m sorry to say that it
gets, if it can do, even worse.
Or at least, no better.
After Poppaea’s death, Nero spotted a
young boy, Sporus, in the streets of Rome.
He decided that the young
boy was the spitting image
of his dead, murdered, wife.
He ordered for the boy to be brought
to his palace, castrated, dressed up as
his dead wife, and then married to Nero.
Seriously grisly stuff indeed.
By this time, there was widespread
consensus that Nero was unfit to rule.
The same year, AD 65, there was a plot
to assassinate him, a plot involving an
influential senator called Piso and even,
reportedly, Nero’s close advisor, Seneca.
But the conspiracy was betrayed
before it could be put into action.
And the repression that
followed was brutal.
Dozens were executed or
forced to commit suicide.
Piso took his own life, and Seneca was
ordered to open his veins, dying in a
bath while dictating calm philosophical
reflections to his students, the
very image of Stoic resignation.
The conspiracy and its bloody
suppression marked a turning point.
Nero no longer pretended
to govern with restraint.
He ruled through fear, with spies and
informers everywhere, and trials for
treason filling the Senate’s time.
And at the same time, he leaned
further into his passions:
performance, theatre, and spectacle.
In AD 66 he travelled to Greece,
competing in chariot races, singing,
and acting in public contests.
The judges, of course, awarded him
victory in every event, but the sight
of the emperor of Rome prancing on
stage further enraged the aristocracy.
And when Nero returned from Greece,
crowned with laurels and declaring
he had won over 1,800 prizes, his
popularity in Rome was lower than ever.
By the late 60s AD, Nero’s
grip on power was crumbling.
The provinces were restless.
The final blow came in AD 68.
Nero ordered one of his governors,
Gaius Julius Vindex, to raise taxes.
Vindex, the governor of Gaul, not
only refused, but rose up in revolt,
declaring Nero unfit to rule.
He was soon joined by Servius Sulpicius
Galba, a governor in Spain, who positioned
himself as a defender of Rome’s liberty.
At first, Nero tried to rally support.
He even talked of leading an army himself.
But when news reached Rome
that even the Praetorian Guard
had deserted him, he panicked.
The Senate declared him a public enemy,
and orders were given for his arrest.
Nero fled the city with a
small group of freedmen.
According to Suetonius, he wandered
aimlessly, begging one of them to find
a quiet place where he could hide.
At last he took refuge
in a villa outside Rome.
There, hearing the sound of horsemen
approaching, he realised it was over.
Suetonius tells us he hesitated,
begging his slaves to kill him.
They refused.
Finally, realising that there
was no escape from here, he drove
a dagger into his own throat.
His last words, supposedly, were
“Qualis artifex pereo” — “What
an artist dies in me.”
It was June AD 68.
Nero was thirty years old, and
with his death the Julio-Claudian
dynasty, the line of Augustus, ended.
As for his legacy, Nero has become
a byword for excess and cruelty: the
emperor who killed his mother, murdered
his wife, persecuted Christians,
and played music while Rome burned.
But as with Caligula, so much of what
we “know” about him comes from hostile
sources, written years after his death.
Tacitus, Suetonius, Cassius Dio, they
all had their own agendas, and wanted
to present Nero in the worst possible
way, so as to present the emperors that
came after him in a more positive light.
So, Nero, was he Rome’s ultimate
villain, or a young man who
was never fit for power?
If seems that the answer
is “a bit of both”.
If the ancient historians are to be
taken at face value, he did monstrous
things, but we must remember that
it was very convenient for him to
be cast as a monster and a tyrant.
And, he was hardly the first.
In Caligula we saw how rumour, scandal,
and fear turned an emperor into a
monster in the public imagination.
With Nero, we saw it again: a young man
who began his reign with promises of
clemency and good government, yet is
remembered forever as a sadistic tyrant.
In our next and final episode in
this mini-series, we will turn to
Commodus, the son of Marcus Aurelius.
Unlike Caligula or Nero, he
inherited a stable empire, ruled
by his philosopher-emperor father.
But Commodus would squander that
legacy, descending into megalomania,
gladiatorial fantasies, and a cruelty
that shocked even a jaded Roman world.
And that, my friends, is what we
have waiting for us next time.
OK, then, that is it for
today's episode on Nero.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As a final reminder in case it
hadn’t sunk in yet, this was part
two of a three-part mini-series.
The first one was on Caligula, and next
up we are going to meet an emperor with
even fewer redeeming qualities, Commodus.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.